可计算性与数理逻辑（第四版）第23章 算术可定义性与力迫部分习题解答
solution to some exercises of cha.23 arithmetical definability and forcing, Computability and Logic (4th edition) 

Definition 1. L is the language of arithmetic.

We write $L^c$ for the expansion of $L$ by adding a constant $c$, and $N^c_a$ for the expansion of $N$ that assigns $c$ as denotation the number $a$. Then a set $S$ of numbers is arithmetically definable if and only if there is a sentence $F(c)$ of $L^c$ such that $S$ is precisely the set of a for which $F(c)$ is true in $N^c_a$.

A family of sets of naturals $B \in P(\omega)$ is arithmetically
definable if there is some formula $\phi(X)$ in the expanded language $L^G$ such that:
$G \in B \Leftrightarrow N[G] \models \phi( \overset{.}G )$.
e.g. $(x = 0 \lor x =1) \rightarrow Gx$ defines $\{\{0,1\},\{0,1,2\},\dots\}$.

Definition 2. a condition is a finite, consistent set of sentences of the language $L^G$ each either of the form $Gm$ or $\sim Gm$.  We say a condition $q$ extends or is an extension of a condition $p$ if $p$ is a subset of $q$.

Definition 3. Forcing is a relation between certain conditions and certain sentences of $L^G$. We write $p \Vdash S$ to mean that condition p forces sentence S. The relation of forcing is
inductively defined by the following five stipulations:
(1) If $S$ is an atomic sentence of $L$, then $p \Vdash S$ if and only if $N \models S$.
(2) If $t$ is a term of $L$ and $m$ is the denotation of $t$ in $N$, then if $S$ is the sentence $Gt$, then $p \Vdash S$ if and only if $Gm$ is in $p$.
(3) If $S$ is a disjunction $(B ∨ C)$, then $p \Vdash S$ if and only if either $p \Vdash B$ or $p \Vdash B$.
(4) If $S$ is an existential quantification $∃xB(x)$, then $p \Vdash S$ if and only if, for some $n$, $p \Vdash B(n)$.
(5) If $S$ is a negation $∼B$, then $p \Vdash S$ if and only if, for every $q$ that extends $p$, it is not the case that $q \Vdash S$.

Definition 4. Let $A$ be a set of numbers. First, we call a condition $p$ $A$-correct if for any $m$, if $Gm$ is in $p$, then $m$ is in $A$, while if $∼Gm$ is in $p$, then $m$ is not in $A$. In other words, $p$ is $A$-correct if and only if $N^G_A$ (the expansion of the standard interpretation $N$ of the language of arithmetic $L$ to an interpretation of the language $L^G$ in which the new predicate $G$ is taken to denote $A$) is a model of $p$. Further, say $A$ FORCES $S$ if some $A$-correct condition forces $S$. Finally, we call $A$ generic if for every sentence $S$ of $L^G$, either $A$ FORCES $S$ or $A$ FORCES $∼S$. If this is so at least for every sentence $S$ with at most $n$ occurrences of logical operators, we call $A$ $n$-generic.

Lemma 23.7 of Boolos. Let $S$ be a sentence of $L^G$, and $A$ a generic set. Then $A$ FORCES $S$ if and only if $N^G_A\models S$.

23.8 Lemma. No generic set is arithmetical.

23.9 Lemma. For any $n$, there is an $n$-generic set $A$ that is arithmetical.

Theorem. The class of arithmetically definable sets of numbers is not an arithmetically definable class of sets.

Problems:

23.6 举出一个语句B，使得偶数集既不力迫B也不力迫~B.
Give a statement B such that the set of even numbers neither forces B nor forces ~B.

$\exists x Odd(x) \land Gx$

.8 如果使用的逻辑运算符是$\sim, \land, \forall$而不是$\sim, \exists, \lor$（并且给定显然类似的力迫定义），那么Addison定理的证明中什么地方会出现问题？
Where would the proof of Addison’s theorem have broken down if we had
worked with ∼, & , ∀ rather than ∼, ∨, ∃ (and made the obvious analogous
stipulations in the definition of forcing)?

Weak forcing and Strong forcing: 

cohen's original approach is called strong forcing relation，which is in a sense obsolete, and its conjunctive and quantifier parts have the obvious definition, e.g. if a condition p "forces" (∃x)ϕ(x) to hold, there should be a term t such that p forces ϕ(t) to hold. (This intuition can be complicated, in the case of set-theoretic forcing, by the fact that the term t will be a P-name. But for recursion-theoretic forcing, t may well just be a natural number.)

However, the logic preserved by the strong forcing relation is intuitionistic, because $p\Vdash \sim\sim p$ does not imply $p\Vdash p$.

We could get weak forcing relation by $c\Vdash_w p \ iff \ c\Vdash_s ~~p$, where $\Vdash_w$ is the weak forcing relation and $\Vdash_s$ is the strong forcing relation.

For example, in recursion theoretic Cohen forcing over a model of PA to construct a generic G⊆N, with the classical forcing relation ⊩, we have ⟨⟩⊩[5∈G∨5∉G], even though ⟨⟩⊮5∈G and ⟨⟩⊮5∉G. This is because ⟨⟩ strongly forces ¬¬(5∈G∨5∉G). Similarly ⟨⟩ forces (∃x)[x∈G] without strongly forcing any particular number to be in G, because ⟨⟩ does not strongly force G to be empty.

Some modern accounts also incorporate classical logic into the definition of forcing by beginning with a limited set of connectives (e.g. including ¬, ∧, and ∀, but not ∃ and not ∨), and then assuming the other connectives are given by their classical definitions, which are not intuitionistically correct.

Strong forcing: $\sim, c \Vdash \lor: c \vdash p \lor c\Vdash q, c \Vdash \exists: \exists x c||-$ (boolos)

weak forcing: $\sim, \land, \forall$ （obvious analogous stipulation）

or

$\bot, \rightarrow: \forall q \le p (q\Vdash \phi \rightarrow q\Vdash \psi), \forall$
Lemma 5. $p \Vdash \phi \rightarrow \psi \ iff \ \lnot\exists q \le p (q \Vdash \phi \land q\Vdash \lnot\psi)$, which gives us $p \Vdash \psi_1 \rightarrow \psi_2$ iff every $q \le p \ q$ forces $\psi_1$ has an extension forces $\psi_2$.

Lemma 6. $p\Vdash \phi \ iff \ \forall q \le p (q\Vdash \ \lnot\phi)$.

"Then the relationship between the two versions is that our $d \Vdash P$ is equivalent to $d \Vdash^C \sim\sim P$, but weaker than $d \Vdash^C P$. So the forward direction of Exercise 7(a) fails for Cohen's forcing. (The reverse direction still holds, because Proposition 6.9 is still true for Cohen's forcing.) Because of this, Cohen's forcing was called strong forcing and what we have presented was called weak forcing. Since Exercise 7(a) is not correct for strong forcing, it is clear that Theorem 6.12 ($\{\}\Vdash P$ for each axiom $P$ of $ZF$; $\{\}\Vdash P$ and $\{\}\Vdash P \rightarrow Q$, then $\{\}\Vdash Q$; $\{\}\Vdash GCH \land V\not=L$) cannot hold for strong forcing either. Cohen used strong forcing as his primary notion, but then essentially used weak forcing (by inserting $\sim\sim$ before every formula) to state his main results. Eventually, weak forcing became the standard way to define forcing, so I have conformed to this usage." (A TOUR THROUGH MATHEMATICAL LOGIC, ROBERT S, WOLF, THE MATHEMATICAL ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA, 2005, p.242)

.9 证明：只有有限子集才是脱疏集的算术子集.
Show that the only arithmetical subsets of a generic set are its finite subsets

对于任何无限算术集合B所对应的谓词P，任何脱疏集A都无法力迫$\forall x (Px \rightarrow Gx)$；假设无限算术集合B是某个脱疏集A的子集，那么A无法力迫$\lnot \forall x (Px \rightarrow Gx)$，与A是脱疏集相矛盾.

For any infinite arithmetic set B, no generic set A can force $\forall x (Bx \rightarrow Gx)$; suppose the infinite arithmetic set B is a subset of some generic set A, then A cannot force $\lnot \forall x (Px \rightarrow Gx)$, contradicting that A is a generic set.

"Suppose we want to decide how many primes are in our generic
set G. Intuitively, a condition could force G to have at least a hundred
primes. A condition could force G to have at least a million primes. On
the other hand, no condition could force G to have fewer than a million
primes. This seems to imply that G must have an infinite number of
primes. Similarly, G should have an infinite number of nonprimes, an
infinite number of even numbers, an infinite number of odd numbers,
etc. Thus, a generic set differs from every definable set."(A tour, p.237)

corollary 8. 偶数集不是任何脱疏集的子集The set of evens is not a subset of any generic set；

9. 素数集不是任何脱疏集的子集The set of primes is not a subset of any generic set. 

.10 证明：如果A是脱疏集，那么{A}不是算术的.
Show that if A is generic, then {A} is not arithmetical.
.11 证明：{A: A是脱疏集}不是算术集.

Show that {A : A is generic} is not arithmetical.

假设结论不成立，则存在$L^G$的语句$S$，使得对于任何集合$B$，$N^G_B\models S$ 当且仅当$B$是$A$/脱疏集. 因此对于集合$A$/任何脱疏集$A$，存在某个$A$-正确的条件$p$力迫$S$. 然而条件只是有限的，因此取某一力迫$S$的条件$p$，取一使得$p$是$C$-正确的有限集合$C$，$C$为$A$/脱疏集，与$A$/脱疏集无限相矛盾.

Suppose not, then there exists a $L^G$ statement $S$ such that for any set $B$, $N^G_B\models S$ iff $B$ is $A$/a generic set. Thus for the set $A$/any generic set $A$, there exists some $A$-correct condition $p$ that forces $S$. However, since the condition is only finite, take a finite set $C$ such that $p$ is $C$-correct, and $C$ is $A$/a generic set, contradicting that $A$/a generic set is infinite.

.12 证明：每个脱疏集包含无限多个素数.
Show that every generic set contains infinitely many prime numbers.

任何集合都无法力迫$\lnot\forall x \exists p (Prime(p) \land p  > x \land Gp)$, 因此脱疏集必然力迫$\forall x \exists p (Prime(p) \land p  > x \land Gp)$. 再由引理23.7 设S是$L^G$的语句，则A力迫S当且仅当$N^G_A \models S$ 得出A有无限个素数.

No set can force $\lnot\forall x \exists p (Prime(p) \land p > x \land Gp)$, so a generic set A must force $\forall x \exists p (Prime(p) \land p > x \land Gp)$. A has infinite primes by Lemma 23.7.

.13 证明：由所有脱疏集组成的类与由自然数集的所有子集组成的类是等势的.
Show that the class of generic sets is nonenumerable.

Lemma 10. (Abusing the notation) The two conditions are equivalent:

1. $M[G] \models \phi \Leftrightarrow \exists p \in G \ M \models (p\Vdash\phi)$
   
2. For all $\phi$ in $SenL^G$, $\exists p \in G \ M \models (p \Vdash \phi) \lor \exists p \in G \ M \models (p \Vdash \lnot \phi)$

Prof. 2 to 1 is just the lemma 23.7;

1 to 2: Suppose not 2, then exists a sentence $B$ of $L^G$ such that $A\not\Vdash B$ and $A \not\Vdash \lnot B$, i.e. $\forall p\Vdash A \ p\not\Vdash B \land p \not\Vdash \lnot B$. $M[G] \not\models \lnot B$, if $M[G] \models B \Leftrightarrow \exists p \in G \ M \models (p\Vdash\phi)$, contradiction; if not, we are done.

"It is generally desirable for generics not to be definable. In countable models, this is guaranteed if the notion of forcing is perfect, where P is defined to be perfect if each condition in P has two incompatible extensions. The full binary tree B is an obvious example of a perfect notion of forcing.

Lemma 6.1.2 If M is countable and P is a perfect notion of forcing, then:

(1) each condition is in $2^{ℵ0}$ generics;

(2) no generic is definable.[the lemma 23.8 of Boolos is a special case of which]" (The Structure of Models of Peano Arithmetic, ROMAN KOSSAK, JAMES H. SCHMERL, CLARENDON PRESS • OXFORD, 2006, p.159)

proposition 11. the set of generic sets is not identity to the set of undefinable sets.

Because there are $2^{\aleph_0}$ expansions of the set of evens, and there are only countable definable sets, therefore there must be undefinable set includes the set of evens.

proposition 12. any set A does not include some set P a infinite definable set, A forces $\lnot \forall x (Px \rightarrow Gx)$.

Another approach to Addison's theorem:

"We are going to consider a collection of real numbers G each of which is a generic object G. This collection has some nice properties:
1. Given any finite chunk of information, p, about G, there are 2$^{\aleph_0}$ many members of G which could contain that information.
2. For a any particular $\phi(x)$ of $L_G$ there is a finite chunk of information p about G, which would force it to be the case that $M[G] \models \phi(\overset{.}G)$ iff that were true.
......
Let A be the arithmetically definable families of sets of naturals. ... Fix an arithmetic set G. There must be some finite chunk p of information regarding G such that $\phi(\overset{.}G)$ is true in any $N[H]$ where p is also true of H. 
But there are $2^{\aleph_0}$ many different ways of expanding from p into a generic $H \in G$ and only countably many members of A .
So let $H \in G -A$ (a generic non-arithmetic set). Then
$N[H] \models \phi( \overset{.}G )$ but $H \not\in A$ : contradiction." (Toby Meadows)

.14 设A是由自然数组成的集合，r是实数，如果当n趋向无限时，比值（A中小于n的元素个数）/n的极限是r，则说A有密度r。证明每个脱疏集都没有密度.
A set of natural numbers is said to have density r, where r is a real number, if it is the limit as n goes to infinity of the ratio (number of members of A < n)/n.
Show that no generic set has a density.

Cohen writes in THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE CONTINUUM HYPOTHESIS (https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.50.6.1143):

"Only those properties which are true in a "uniform" manner for "generic" subsets of ω in M [the first model] shall be true for the aδ [the ordinal-length sequence of subsets] in N [the new model]. For example, each aδ contains infinitely many primes, has no asymptotic density, etc."


