ZF without regularity has a strong relationship to another theory, ZFA1, which is set theory with atoms. Basically, in addition to the sets, we have a class of atoms that can be elements of sets but have no elements themselves. Note that foundation is still an axiom of ZFA: intuitively instead of every set being "built up" from the empty set as in the cumulative hierarchy, we also allow the atoms as building blocks. What really is being modified is extensionality, since the atoms have no elements, but are distinct from the empty set.

To see the relationship, imagine a model of ZFA with exactly one atom. Nothing is stopping us from saying that instead of having no elements, that atom has only itself as an element (hence is a Quine atom). Then we get can get extensionality back by identifying sets with the same elements, e.g. if a is the atom, a, {a}, and {{a}} and so on, were previously distinct sets, but no longer. But of course we lost foundation, so we have a model of ZF with regularity replaced by its negation. More complicated examples can be constructed (e.g. "double Quine atoms" with a={b} and b={a}).

This is pretty close in spirit from your initial impression that we should just append a Quine atom somehow. But we started from a model of ZFA, whereas we wanted to start from a model of ZF. But it's no worry: we can build models of ZFA inside models of ZF. (And the converse, which is slightly easier: just take the subclass of "pure" sets without atoms in their transitive closure.) Just grab two different infinite subsets of ω, call one the empty set and the other the atom, let X={r1,r2} and then recursively construct the hierarchy C0=X,
Cα+1=P(Cα)−∅,
Cλ=⋃α<λCλ. Then C=⋃αCα is a model of ZFA with one atom. This can be generalized to produce models with any set-sized collection of atoms... the only important thing is you start with your empty set and atoms having the same rank so they don't wind up accidentally having elements. (See also the approach in another one from the same series of Matti Rubin's notes that Asaf linked in the comments. You can tag the atoms with a 0 and the sets with a 1. He shows you can also get a proper class of atoms this same way.)

There is also a very simple approach that does not go through ZFA that I can't remember where I learned. Start with a model (V,∈) of ZF. Define the relation E on V as follows: Let E be the same as ∈, except make 1 E-empty and 0 have 0 as its only E-element. It’s straightforward but tedious to check that all of ZF except foundation holds in (V,E).

More generally, for any permutation σ of V you can define E by aEb⟺a∈σ(b). The above is the special case where the permutation swaps 0 and 1. This allows you to make models with more general violations than just having a Quine atom.

Another approach is anti-foundation axioms, which are more principled choices of axioms that conflict with regularity rather than just 'there are Quine atoms'. You can read all about them in Aczel's book. The approach to consistency is similar (he constructs a "proper class model"), but more complicated due to the more demanding nature of the antifoundation axiom than just the negation of regularity.

1 As an aside, ZFA is important in the study of the axiom of choice, since it is the theory in which permutation models are built, which were historically the first models constructed that exhibited the failure of the axiom of choice and can often be reworked into symmetric models of the failure of choice in ZF.